# Resource Pack Management
This document explains Gamemode 4's Resource Pack management tools, which use custom beet plugins to remove lots of redundancy in the source code.

## Table of Contents
* [Getting Started](#getting-started)
    * [Building the Resource Pack](#building-the-resource-pack)
* [Custom Model Data](#custom-model-data)
* [Language Support](#language-support)
* [Model Templates](#model-templates)
* [Model Transforms](#model-transforms)
* [Advanced Usage](#advanced-usage)
    * [`model_data` Config](#model_data-config)
    * [`gui_fonts` Config](#gui_fonts-config)
    * [`translation_linter_ignores` Config](#translation_linter_ignores-config)
    * [Custom Model Data Allocations](#custom-model-data-allocations)
    * [Extending `TemplateOptions`](#extending-templateoptions)
    * [Extending `TransformOptions`](#extending-transformoptions)
    * [Extending `ContainerGuiOptions`](#extending-containerguioptions)

## Getting Started
Just like how data pack resources are stored in a `data` directory, resource pack assets are stored in an `assets` directory for each module, and follow the same structure as an ordinary minecraft resource pack. 

Beet must be configured to load these files by adding to the `beet.yaml`:
```yaml
resource_pack:
  load: .
```

### Building the Resource Pack
When building a single or list of modules with `beet dev`, a combined resource pack containing assets for the specified modules is built in the `out` directory. If the beet `--link` option is set, the pack will also be sent to Minecraft's resource packs folder.

Since Gamemode 4 publishes a single resource pack that contains textures for all our modules combined, building a complete copy of the resource pack locally requires building every module. Since this often takes a while, developers are encouraged to only build the packs they are currently working on to save time.

## Custom Model Data
String references can be used instead of hard-to-remember integers when dealing with custom model data. After configuring the custom model data values your data pack will use a mecha plugin will auto-assign the unique integer values and substitute them into the data pack output by the beet build process. 

```yaml
model_data:
  - item: rabbit_hide
    reference: gm4_bat_grenades:item/bat_leather
    template: generated
```
```mcfunction
give @s rabbit_hide[custom_model_data="gm4_bat_grenades:item/bat_leather"]
summon item ~ ~ ~ {Item:{id:"rabbit_hide",count:1,components:{"minecraft:custom_model_data":"item/bat_leather"}}}
```

For full details about the `model_data` config see [`model_data` Config](#model_data-config)

## Language Support
Support for additional languages is managed through babelbox, which uses a spreadsheet of translation keys and their corresponding values in multiple languages, which can be located at either `gm4_module_name/translations.csv` or `gm4_module_name/assets/translations.csv`. Individual language `.json` files are then generated by the build process.

English (en_us) translation values are required for every translation key used in the pack. Other languages are optional and entries can be left empty if no translation is available.

Example translations.csv:
```csv
key,en_us,de_de
item.gm4.bat_leather,Bat Leather,Fledermausleder
text.gm4.bat_leather.1,"Would make for a very strange,","W端rde eine ziemlich merkw端rde,"
text.gm4.bat_leather.2,very tiny jacket,ziemlich kleine Jacke ergeben
```

Which if opened as a spreadsheet like excel or libreoffice is structured as

|key|en_us|de_de|
| - | --- | --- |
|item.gm4.bat_leather|Bat Leather|Fledermausleder|
|text.gm4.bat_leather.1|Would make for a very strange,|W端rde eine ziemlich merkw端rde,|
|text.gm4.bat_leather.2|very tiny jacket|ziemlich kleine Jacke ergeben|

English translations can also be auto-filled from text component fallbacks in other project files by setting `babelbox_backfill` to True in the build options. This is especially useful when adding guidebook translations, normally defined in `guidebook.json` to the `translations.csv`. 

```
beet -s meta.gm4.babelbox_backfill=True dev bat_grenades
```

## Model Templates
Templates allow for easy generation of common model file structures. Uses the `textures` field (or its default value of `reference`) to find the texture file(s). Available default templates are:

- `custom`: does not generate a model file(s).
- `generated`: generates a model of the minecraft:item/generated parent. Often used to turn a single texture image into a flat held item in-game. e.g.
```yaml
- item: firework_star
  reference: item/everstone
  template: generated
```
- `generated_overlay`: generates a model with two layers, where the second texture is the same as the first, followed by `_overlay`. Intended for potions and other similar items
- `handheld`: generates a mode of the `minecraft:item/handheld` parent. Used for turning single textures into a tool item in-game.
- `vanilla`: use the vanilla item model. Often used when no textures exist yet but a CMD value should still be reserved.
- `block`: generates a model of the minecraft:block/cube parent. Textures are specified in the order [top, bottom, front, side], or by mapping to their names. e.g.
```yaml
- item: piston
  template: block
  reference: block/forming_press
  textures:
      front: block/forming_press_side
      side: block/forming_press_side
      top: block/forming_press_top_out
      bottom: block/forming_press_bottom
 - item: enchanting_table
   template: block
   reference: block/enchantment_extractor
   textures:
      - block/enchantment_extractor_top_out
      - minecraft:block/furnace_top
      - block/enchantment_extractor_side
      - block/enchantment_extractor_side
```
- `advancement`: generates a model to be used in an advancement icon. This is a different CMD from the actual item to facilitate retexturing just the advancement and not the whole item. Redirects to a specified forward model file. This template ignores the model config field.
```yaml
- item: gunpowder
  reference: gui/advancement/bat_grenades
  template:
    name: advancement
    forward: item/bat_leather
```
- `legacy_machine_block`: generates a model following the block template, but with a set of transformations that scale and translate the model to match the position/scale of the "block on the head of a small armor stand" that is used in so many of our machine blocks.

Individual modules can also create their own templates (see [here](#extending-templateoptions)) that may be imported and used. The most common of these is metallurgy's `shamir`, which generates models for a shamir band, and tool/armor models with the shamir applied. Has the following sub-config:

- `textures_path`: directory of textures to use when the shamir is on a tool. Textures from metallurgy will be substituted for any missing textures. Unless the shamir has unique textures, its recommended to just use the metallurgy folder corresponding to the metal type.
- `metal`: which metal this shamir is
This template also overrides the item field of the config to allow more broad item groups, such as `armor`, `tools`, `weapons`, `axes`, `helmets` ect...
```yaml
- item: swords
    reference: shamir/corripio
    template:
      name: shamir
      metal: bismuth
      textures_path: gm4_metallurgy:item/shamir/bismuth
```

## Model Transforms
The `transforms` field of model config is used to apply transformations (rotation/translation/scale) to a template-generated (or custom provided) model. 
The plugin only defines one available transform: 

- `item_display`. This transform does the convenience calculations for an item model that will be displayed by an item display entity. By first setting up the display entity without the resource pack, and providing the entite's display parameters, the specified model will be modified to a 1-block scale, aligned with the block grid.
Accepts the required parameters `origin`, `scale`, and the optional parameters `translation=[0,0,0]`, `rotation=[0,0,0]`, `display=head`

```yaml
- item: glass
  template: custom
  reference: block/liquid_tank
  transforms:
    - name: item_display
      origin: [0.5,0.9,0.5]
      scale: [0.438,0.438,0.438]
      translation: [0,0,0]
      display: head
```

## Advanced Usage
The following sections of this guide describes more advanced features of the resource pack plugin, that may be required for developers wishing to add additional templates or interact with special fonts.

### `model_data` Config
All custom model data and model template config information is stored either in `meta.gm4.model_data` field of `beet.yaml`, or in the `model_data` field of the separate config file `assets/model_data.yaml`. This is a list of compounds, each of which accepts the following fields: 

- `item`: (required) item name, or list of item names this custom model data will be applied to.
- `reference`: (required) the unique string reference to be used in source files e.g. item/bat_leather. If no namespace is specified, the module's namespace will be assumed.
It is recommended to format references according to the type of item it applies to. e.g. `item/...`, `block/...`, `gui/...` ect, and especially recommended to use the model/texture file path where possible.
- `model`: (optional) the model file(s) to display on items with this custom model data. If not specified, will default to the same value as `reference`.
Accepts a string or list of strings, one for each item present in item. May be formatted as a dictionary mapping items to models e.g.
```yaml
item: [apple, potato]
model:
  apple: item/my_model_apple
  potato: item/my_model_potato
```
More complex model predicates for items with multiple vanilla models (e.g. elytra & broken elytra, clock ect) can be specified here as a list of predicates, following the same syntax as model files e.g.
```yaml
model:
  - predicate: {broken: 0}
    model: item/elytra/captains_wings
  - predicate: {broken: 1}
    model: item/elytra/broken_captains_wings
```
This list of predicates may also be mapped to a specific item as above.

```yaml
item: [apple, elytra]
model:
  apple: my_model_apple
  elytra:
    - predicate: {broken: 0}
      model: item/elytra/captains_wings
    - predicate: {broken: 1}
      model: item/elytra/broken_captains_wings
```
Items who have multiple vanilla models, like clocks, who do not have the manual predicates specified in model will have the same provided model file applied to all variants.

- `template` (optional), a model-file generating template to apply. Accepts a string name of a template, or a compound containing template configuration values. Defaults to `custom`, which generates no Model files. See [here](#model-templates) for details on available templates.
- `transforms` (optional), a list of model transforms to apply. Accepts a compound of configuration data. See [here](#model-transforms) for details on available transforms.
- `textures` (optional), a string, list of strings, or mapping of texture files to supply to the template.
- `broadcast` (optional*), a list of sub-configs which will inherit the current config values. This reduces redundancy when defining many similar references. Due to the inheritance, each config need not contain every required field, so long as after the broadcast is carried out all required fields have a value. e.g.

```yaml
model_data:
  - item: player_head
    template: generated
    broadcast:
      - textures: item/band/mundane_band
        reference: item/mundane_band
      - reference: item/lump/baryte
      - reference: item/lump/bauxite
      - reference: item/lump/bismutite
      - reference: item/lump/thorianite
```

### `gui_fonts` Config
Custom textured GUIs using fonts can easily be setup using the `meta.gm4.gui_fonts` entry of `beet.yaml` or the `gui_fonts` entry of `model_data.yaml`. These will create a translation that displays a given image texture inside a container, like a dropper or hopper. Empty images of the correct size are available in the `base` to use as a starting point for custom GUIs. 

Available options are: 

- `translation`: the translation key that will become the texture. Recommended to follow the format `gui.gm4.my_container`.
- `texture`: the image texture to display
- `container`: the type of container the gui will display inside. Currently accepts `dropper`, and `hopper`. Additional containers formats can be added by [extending the ContainerGuiOptions class](#extending-containerguioptions).

```yaml
gui_fonts:
  - translation: gui.gm4.auto_crafter
    container: dropper
    texture: gm4:gui/container/empty_dropper
```
### `translation_linter_ignores` Config
Individual translation keys can be excluded from the mecha linting process by adding them to the `meta.gm4.translation_linter_ignores` config in `beet.yaml`. This should only be used in unusual situations where translations are being used in other ways than displaying text. 

### Custom Model Data Allocations
Sometimes it is desirable to put all the custom model data integer values near each-other for organizational purposes. There is a manual config available in the `modeldata_registry.json` file, which lets sets up additional ranges for a module (or glob of modules) that can be auto assigned by the resource pack plugin.

```json
    "gm4_orb_of_ankou": [
      200,
      299
    ],
    "*_shamir": [
      100,
      199
    ],
```

### Extending TemplateOptions
Individual modules may create and configure their own model templates by extending the `TemplateOptions` class in a beet plugin. The subclass must define its name as a class variable, and a `process` method which creates the models, mounts them to the pack, and returns them in a list. Additional instance attributes can be defined, and their values will be filled by any values provided in the `model_data` config under `template`.

Has the following class attributes and methods that may be overridden:
#### Properties
- `name`: (required) A unique string that identifies this template and is set in the `template` field of `model_data`.
- `default_transforms`: (optional) A list of `TransformOptions` instances. Used to give a template transformations that are applied by default, such as for a series of custom weapons with special offsets in the hand slots. 
- `texture_map`: (optional) A list of strings that defines the ordering of textures when configured in list form. Allows the model creation to access `config.textures` by key instead of index, which may be more robust. 

#### Methods
- `process(self, config: ModelData, models_container: NamespaceProxy[Model]) -> list[Model]:`: Creates the required model(s) instances defined by the `config`, mounts them to the pack `models_container` at the proper location, and returns the models for further transformation processing. 
- `add_namespace(self, namespace: str)`: Adds the pack namespace to any additional attributes added by this subclass, and returns a new instance of this `TemplateOptions` with that namespace applied.
- `mutate_config(self, config: ModelData)`: Allows this template to mutate/mangle root level fields of the parent `ModelData`, such as `model` or `reference`. Used for unusual models like metallurgy's `shamir` that allow item groups in the `item` field for convenience. 

### Extending TransformOptions
Individual modules may create their own transformations by extending the `TransformOptions` class in a beet plugin. The subclass must define its name as a class variable, an `apply_transform` method that modifies a given model with the appropriate offsets, and any additional instance attributes required for that particular transform. 

#### Methods
- `apply_transform(self, model: Model) -> None`: Modifies the given `Model` instance in-place with the desired display offset settings. 

### Extending ContainerGuiOptions
Individual modules may add containers to `gui_fonts` as needed by extending the `ContainerGuiOptions` class in a beet plugin. The subclass is responsible for requisitioning unicode characters from a central counter and returning the appropriate translation value and font providers. 

The inherited method `next_unicode(counter_cache: Cache)` can be used to easily get a unique unicode character.

Additionally, there are two extendable subclasses already available for containers whose name is centered (like a dropper) and right-aligned (like a hopper). They are `CenteredContainerGui` and `RightAlignedGui` respectively.

#### Methods
- `process(self, config: GuiFont, counter_cache: Cache) -> tuple[str, list[dict[str, Any]]]`: Requisitions unique characters and returns the translation value (usually made of these characters), and a list of font providers, which usually reference `config.texture`.
